README.md, before:

[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/bdrung/bdebstrap/CI)](https://github.com/bdrung/bdebstrap/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![Codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/bdrung/bdebstrap)](https://codecov.io/gh/bdrung/bdebstrap)
[![Code Style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-black)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![License: ISC](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-ISC-blue)](LICENSE)
[![Debian package](https://img.shields.io/debian/v/bdebstrap/unstable)](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/bdebstrap)
[![Ubuntu package](https://img.shields.io/ubuntu/v/bdebstrap)](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/bdebstrap)

bdebstrap
=========

bdebstrap is an alternative to debootstrap and a wrapper around
[mmdebstrap](https://gitlab.mister-muffin.de/josch/mmdebstrap/) to support
YAML based configuration files. It inherits all benefits from mmdebstrap. The
support for configuration allows storing all customization in a YAML file
instead of having to use a very long one-liner call to mmdebstrap. It also
layering multiple customizations on top of each other, e.g. to support flavors
of an image.

Usage examples
==============

Minimal Debian unstable tarball
-------------------------------

This example shows how to use a small YAML configuration to build a minimal
Debian unstable tarball. Assume following configuration is stored in
*examples/Debian-unstable.yaml*:

```yaml
---
mmdebstrap:
  keyrings:
    - /usr/share/keyrings/debian-archive-keyring.gpg
  mode: unshare
  suite: unstable
  target: root.tar.xz
  variant: minbase
```

Then the tarball can be generated by running

```sh
$ bdebstrap -c examples/Debian-unstable.yaml --name example1
$ ls example1/
config.yaml  manifest  root.tar.xz
```

Debian live system
------------------

This example shows how to use a YAML configuration to build a Debian 11
(bullseye) live system. Assume following configuration is stored in
*examples/Debian-bullseye-live.yaml*:

```yaml
---
mmdebstrap:
  architectures:
    - amd64
  cleanup-hooks:
    - cp /dev/null "$1/etc/hostname"
    - if test -f "$1/etc/resolv.conf"; then cp /dev/null "$1/etc/resolv.conf"; fi
  customize-hooks:
    - cp --preserve=timestamps -v "$1"/boot/vmlinu* "$1${BDEBSTRAP_OUTPUT_DIR?}/vmlinuz"
    - cp --preserve=timestamps -v "$1"/boot/initrd.img* "$1${BDEBSTRAP_OUTPUT_DIR?}/initrd.img"
    - mkdir -p "$1/root/.ssh"
    - upload ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub /root/.ssh/authorized_keys
    # Set 'debian' as root password. Create a secure root password with "openssl passwd -6 $password"!
    - chroot "$1" usermod -p
      '$6$ojM9XUz3tre8c/Ah$gBBIjy5zyhFMtJnQmK3YYXL8APHk9gTz.hlQP6AZnLV79bkQddUqOnTpcltEW.7l/OAq4u5.SMgDq1LL8u6BM/' root
  keyrings:
    - /usr/share/keyrings/debian-archive-keyring.gpg
  mode: unshare
  packages:
    - init
    - iproute2
    - less
    - libpam-systemd  # recommended by systemd and needed to not run into https://bugs.debian.org/751636
    - linux-image-cloud-amd64
    - live-boot
    - locales
    - openssh-server
  suite: bullseye
  target: root.squashfs
  variant: minbase
```

This example assumes that *~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub* exists, because it will be
copied into the image to */root/.ssh/authorized_keys* to allow SSH access
using the user's SSH key.

The squashfs image can be generated by running

```sh
$ bdebstrap -c examples/Debian-bullseye-live.yaml --name example2
$ ls example2/
config.yaml  initrd.img  manifest  root.squashfs  vmlinuz
```

The kernel and initrd are copied out of the squashfs image using customize
hooks to allow them to be used directly by QEMU. To launch this image locally
with QEMU, the *root.squashfs* image needs to be provided by a HTTP server:

```sh
$ python3 -m http.server -b localhost --directory example2 8080
```

This command exposes the generated image via HTTP on localhost on port 8080.
QEMU can be started passing the TCP traffic on port 8080 to the webserver:

```sh
$ cd example2
$ qemu-system-x86_64 -machine accel=kvm -m 1G -device virtio-net-pci,netdev=net0 -monitor vc \
    -netdev user,id=net0,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22,guestfwd=tcp:10.0.2.252:8080-tcp:localhost:8080,hostname=debian-live \
    -kernel ./vmlinuz -initrd ./initrd.img -append "boot=live fetch=http://10.0.2.252:8080/root.squashfs quiet"
```

To print the output on the launching terminal, add *-nographic -serial stdio*
to the QEMU command line and *console=ttyS0* to the *-append* parameter. Once
the virtual machine is started, it can be accessed via SSH:

```sh
$ ssh -oUserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -oStrictHostKeyChecking=no -p 2222 root@localhost
```

Prerequisites
=============

* Python >= 3
* Python modules:
  * ruamel.yaml
* mmdebstrap (>= 0.6.0)
* pandoc (to generate the man page)
* squashfs-tools-ng (>= 0.8) for building squashfs images. Older versions of
  squashfs-tools-ng throw errors
  ([bug #31](https://github.com/AgentD/squashfs-tools-ng/issues/31)) and loose
  the security capabilities
  ([bug #32](https://github.com/AgentD/squashfs-tools-ng/issues/32)).


The test cases have additional Python module requirements:

* black
* flake8
* isort
* pylint

Thanks
======

I like to thank Johannes Schauer for developing
[mmdebstrap](https://gitlab.mister-muffin.de/josch/mmdebstrap/) and for quickly
responding to all my bug reports and feature requests.

Contributing
============

Contributions are welcome. The source code has some test coverage, which should
be preserved. So please provide a test case for each bugfix and one or more
test cases for each new feature. Please follow
[How to Write a Git Commit Message](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/)
for writing good commit messages.

Creating releases
=================

This project uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/). To create a
release, increase the version in `setup.py` and document the noteworthy changes
in `NEWS.md`. Then commit the changes and tag the release:

```
git commit -sm "Release bdebstrap $(./setup.py --version)" NEWS.md setup.py
git tag v$(./setup.py --version)
```

The xz-compressed release tarball can be generated by running:
```
name="bdebstrap-$(./setup.py --version)"
git archive --prefix="$name/" HEAD | xz -c9 > "../$name.tar.xz"
gpg --output "../$name.tar.xz.asc" --armor --detach-sign "../$name.tar.xz"
```

Commit message:

Add disable-units and enable-units hooks
Add the hook scripts `disable-units` and `enable-units` for disabling
and enabling services / systemd units.

Signed-off-by: Benjamin Drung <bdrung@posteo.de>

README.md, after:

[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/bdrung/bdebstrap/CI)](https://github.com/bdrung/bdebstrap/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![Codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/bdrung/bdebstrap)](https://codecov.io/gh/bdrung/bdebstrap)
[![Code Style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-black)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![License: ISC](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-ISC-blue)](LICENSE)
[![Debian package](https://img.shields.io/debian/v/bdebstrap/unstable)](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/bdebstrap)
[![Ubuntu package](https://img.shields.io/ubuntu/v/bdebstrap)](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/bdebstrap)

bdebstrap
=========

bdebstrap is an alternative to debootstrap and a wrapper around
[mmdebstrap](https://gitlab.mister-muffin.de/josch/mmdebstrap/) to support
YAML based configuration files. It inherits all benefits from mmdebstrap. The
support for configuration allows storing all customization in a YAML file
instead of having to use a very long one-liner call to mmdebstrap. It also
layering multiple customizations on top of each other, e.g. to support flavors
of an image.

Usage examples
==============

Minimal Debian unstable tarball
-------------------------------

This example shows how to use a small YAML configuration to build a minimal
Debian unstable tarball. Assume following configuration is stored in
*examples/Debian-unstable.yaml*:

```yaml
---
mmdebstrap:
  keyrings:
    - /usr/share/keyrings/debian-archive-keyring.gpg
  mode: unshare
  suite: unstable
  target: root.tar.xz
  variant: minbase
```

Then the tarball can be generated by running

```sh
$ bdebstrap -c examples/Debian-unstable.yaml --name example1
$ ls example1/
config.yaml  manifest  root.tar.xz
```

Debian live system
------------------

This example shows how to use a YAML configuration to build a Debian 11
(bullseye) live system. Assume following configuration is stored in
*examples/Debian-bullseye-live.yaml*:

```yaml
---
mmdebstrap:
  architectures:
    - amd64
  cleanup-hooks:
    - cp /dev/null "$1/etc/hostname"
    - if test -f "$1/etc/resolv.conf"; then cp /dev/null "$1/etc/resolv.conf"; fi
  customize-hooks:
    - cp --preserve=timestamps -v "$1"/boot/vmlinu* "$1${BDEBSTRAP_OUTPUT_DIR?}/vmlinuz"
    - cp --preserve=timestamps -v "$1"/boot/initrd.img* "$1${BDEBSTRAP_OUTPUT_DIR?}/initrd.img"
    - mkdir -p "$1/root/.ssh"
    - upload ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub /root/.ssh/authorized_keys
    # Set 'debian' as root password. Create a secure root password with "openssl passwd -6 $password"!
    - chroot "$1" usermod -p
      '$6$ojM9XUz3tre8c/Ah$gBBIjy5zyhFMtJnQmK3YYXL8APHk9gTz.hlQP6AZnLV79bkQddUqOnTpcltEW.7l/OAq4u5.SMgDq1LL8u6BM/' root
  keyrings:
    - /usr/share/keyrings/debian-archive-keyring.gpg
  mode: unshare
  packages:
    - init
    - iproute2
    - less
    - libpam-systemd  # recommended by systemd and needed to not run into https://bugs.debian.org/751636
    - linux-image-cloud-amd64
    - live-boot
    - locales
    - openssh-server
  suite: bullseye
  target: root.squashfs
  variant: minbase
```

This example assumes that *~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub* exists, because it will be
copied into the image to */root/.ssh/authorized_keys* to allow SSH access
using the user's SSH key.

The squashfs image can be generated by running

```sh
$ bdebstrap -c examples/Debian-bullseye-live.yaml --name example2
$ ls example2/
config.yaml  initrd.img  manifest  root.squashfs  vmlinuz
```

The kernel and initrd are copied out of the squashfs image using customize
hooks to allow them to be used directly by QEMU. To launch this image locally
with QEMU, the *root.squashfs* image needs to be provided by a HTTP server:

```sh
$ python3 -m http.server -b localhost --directory example2 8080
```

This command exposes the generated image via HTTP on localhost on port 8080.
QEMU can be started passing the TCP traffic on port 8080 to the webserver:

```sh
$ cd example2
$ qemu-system-x86_64 -machine accel=kvm -m 1G -device virtio-net-pci,netdev=net0 -monitor vc \
    -netdev user,id=net0,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22,guestfwd=tcp:10.0.2.252:8080-tcp:localhost:8080,hostname=debian-live \
    -kernel ./vmlinuz -initrd ./initrd.img -append "boot=live fetch=http://10.0.2.252:8080/root.squashfs quiet"
```

To print the output on the launching terminal, add *-nographic -serial stdio*
to the QEMU command line and *console=ttyS0* to the *-append* parameter. Once
the virtual machine is started, it can be accessed via SSH:

```sh
$ ssh -oUserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null -oStrictHostKeyChecking=no -p 2222 root@localhost
```

Hooks
=====

bdebstrap ships a bunch of hook scripts that can be used to configure the
produced chroot. The environment variable `BDEBSTRAP_HOOKS` can be used to
refer to the path to the hook script. Available hooks:

* disable-units
* enable-units

Disable/enable services
-----------------------

The `disable-units` and `enable-units` hook script can be used to
disable/enable services. Either service names or full systemd unit names should
be specified. Example:

```yaml
---
mmdebstrap:
  customize-hooks:
    - $BDEBSTRAP_HOOKS/disable-units "$1" apt-daily.timer cron
    - $BDEBSTRAP_HOOKS/enable-units "$1" systemd-timesyncd
  suite: bullseye
  target: root.tar
  variant: important
```

Prerequisites
=============

* Python >= 3
* Python modules:
  * ruamel.yaml
* mmdebstrap (>= 0.6.0)
* pandoc (to generate the man page)
* squashfs-tools-ng (>= 0.8) for building squashfs images. Older versions of
  squashfs-tools-ng throw errors
  ([bug #31](https://github.com/AgentD/squashfs-tools-ng/issues/31)) and loose
  the security capabilities
  ([bug #32](https://github.com/AgentD/squashfs-tools-ng/issues/32)).


The test cases have additional Python module requirements:

* black
* flake8
* isort
* pylint
* shellcheck

Thanks
======

I like to thank Johannes Schauer for developing
[mmdebstrap](https://gitlab.mister-muffin.de/josch/mmdebstrap/) and for quickly
responding to all my bug reports and feature requests.

Contributing
============

Contributions are welcome. The source code has some test coverage, which should
be preserved. So please provide a test case for each bugfix and one or more
test cases for each new feature. Please follow
[How to Write a Git Commit Message](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/)
for writing good commit messages.

Creating releases
=================

This project uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/). To create a
release, increase the version in `setup.py` and document the noteworthy changes
in `NEWS.md`. Then commit the changes and tag the release:

```
git commit -sm "Release bdebstrap $(./setup.py --version)" NEWS.md setup.py
git tag v$(./setup.py --version)
```

The xz-compressed release tarball can be generated by running:
```
name="bdebstrap-$(./setup.py --version)"
git archive --prefix="$name/" HEAD | xz -c9 > "../$name.tar.xz"
gpg --output "../$name.tar.xz.asc" --armor --detach-sign "../$name.tar.xz"
```
